Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops. And
today I'm joined by Katerina Kovacevic. She is a
phd candidate in the Department of Cognitive Science at Central
European University. Her main research interest is responsibility.
She investigates how people ascribe responsibility for good and bad
outcomes across various situations. And today we're focusing on
uh responsibility and strategic ignorance. So Karina, welcome
to the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone
. Thank you. It's also a pleasure from OK
. So uh actually, this is very interesting because
uh I've already talked about responsibility with philosophers on the
show, but not with someone who approaches it from
a sort of uh psychological slash cognitive science perspective.
So, uh how do you approach responsibility from that
perspective? And what kinds of questions are you trying
to answer in your research actually? Yeah, that's
a good question to make some kind of a distinction
in the approach of philosophers and psychologists uh to this
type of topics. Um The main difference is that
we in psychology approach from the descriptive perspective, which
means that we don't want to say what is right
, what is wrong how people should ascribe responsibility in
which cases, but rather how people do that,
what are people's moral intuitions? Um And um when
do they feel like it's um um good to,
to um ascribe responsibility, what are some relevant factors
for them that influences their intuitions and their, their
decisions? And um when we talk about the methodology
, so how I approach this um is uh mostly
through V studies uh which is when you write a
certain story um about some hypothetical agents. And then
you ask the person um some questions about their moral
judgments such as um is the person responsible for the
certain outcome um in the story. And since I'm
interested in um different factors that could influence the description
of responsibility, then I just vary uh the context
of the story, what the agent knew what they
didn't know uh what were their intentions and similar to
see whether that would trigger different intuitions, uh moral
intuitions in, in participants. Um Yeah, and
also what psychologists do um when investigating responsibility and some
other moral judgments is uh especially in my department because
I'm a cognitive scientist, we um discover the processes
behind uh this moral judgment. So what kind of
cognitive process lies behind certain intuitions? In my case
, I talk a lot about counterfactual thinking, for
example, that is a thinking of possible alternatives.
If this didn't happen, then something else wouldn't have
happened. Um So yeah, that's like a,
a crash course on what um psychologist does in uh
in this type of a field. Yeah. OK
. So let's get into some of your results and
what we know about how people ascribe responsibility to others
in different kinds of situations and so on. So
when exactly do people as ascribe responsibility to others?
Um So I will start first from a more bro
broad answer. So, um when I talk about
responsibility, I, I talk mostly in my current
research about responsibility for the negative outcome. Um Then
I see um which factors influence um people to ascribe
responsibility more or less likely. So what are some
kind of a mitigating factors in ascribing responsibility? And
what I be shown by now is that um something
that has been already known um to an extent that
epistemic states a relevant factor, so whether the agent
uh knew what would be the possible consequences of their
actions or they didn't know. So some kind of
beliefs about the situation and what could happen, the
level of knowledge and information. Um And um moreover
, which is not a factor that I, that
I provide in my studies, but it is important
to mention is um intentions that they don't have.
Um So if you have desire to harm the others
, uh then it's more likely that you will be
ascribed as responsible uh for uh some kind of a
bad outcome. But in my research, I mostly
focus on um this peculiar case of agents, uh
, who could have had the knowledge, um,
to see how people ascribe responsibility to them, um
, in, um, so to see how people
react to ignorant agents and how they, uh,
distinguish them from the people who have the knowledge.
Um, yeah, because it's, it's been shown
like, um, that when you have the knowledge
you're more likely to be responsible but the fact that
you're ignorant is not always escalating. So that's interesting
to see when it is and when it isn't exculpating
. Yeah. So you're mostly interested here in epistemic
responsibility, correct? Yeah, but just a bit
of a disclaimer. Um I, I'm pretty sure
that philosophers will have a different definition of what epistemic
responsibility is. Uh whether there's a duty to know
enough about before forming certain attitudes, how I operationalize
epistemic responsibility in my case is more something like epistemic
duty, which is a duty to get informed before
acting. Um And that means that if you have
a certain sufficient care for other people, you,
there is some kind of a normative expectation that you
would take certain precautionary measures or certain actions to get
informed um before uh doing something that could hire mothers
uh or similar. So that is what I I
talk about when I talk about epistemic responsibility. So
basically that there is um when you have sufficient care
for others, you have epistemic intention, which is
intention to learn the relevant information that leads to checking
and that leads to preventing the negative outcome from happening
because now you have the relevant adequate knowledge for that
. So let's get a little bit into more detail
here. So what if people act without relevant or
sufficient knowledge in their possession? I mean, are
they, are they held responsible or not or are
they held responsible in particular situations and not others?
How does it work? Exactly? Well, as
uh my b A professor, like to say,
uh the best answer is it depends. Uh but
now I will, I will explain why it depends
. Um So what we know by now is that
in a lot of cases, as I already mentioned
to repeat is that uh being knowledgeable um is um
more um being, being more judged than, than
having a lack of knowledge about certain situations. But
the fact that you didn't know about something uh is
not enough. Um in some cases, for example
, you cannot say if you travel to another country
and you didn't buy the transport ticket, you cannot
say, oh, I didn't know how to use
the machine, um which could be the truth that
you didn't know how to exactly buy the ticket,
but it was your, your obligation to get informed
how to do that. Um So um or when
you produce some kind of um uh very bad uh
consequences, for example, you're a doctor and you
didn't check some important allergy when you are prescribed the
, the, the the medication. Um you cannot
say, oh, I didn't know about that because
it was kind of an obligation to get informed about
that. Um But what we show in, in
our research as a very important factor in this case
is whether there was an opportunity to learn the information
that is very important. Um If there was no
opportunity to learn the information, the relevant quant factual
. So this relevant alternative is about some external factors
. So if it would have been possible to learn
the relevant information, then the person would have done
that. But if there was the opportunity to learn
something relevant, but you deliberately chose not to do
that, then you're more likely to be as scrapped
as responsible. Um And concretely in our um experiments
, those agents who uh didn't take the opportunity to
learn that they had were um they ascribe responsibility almost
the same as the agents who knew about the possible
negative consequences. For example, um If uh you
see there is a sign that parking spots are maybe
uh reserved, but you don't really approach to check
it because you're rushing for your dentist appointment um that's
seen as negative and you are described as responsible.
Um statistically even the same as uh as a person
who sees that the the spot is re uh reserved
, but just doesn't do anything about that. So
there is something in this opportunity to learn that people
um take is important. Um We interpret this as
that um people think about um counter factuals that are
related to epistemic intentions. So explain this a bit
more what I mean by this is that people think
whether there would have been uh an agent who had
a better um more sufficient concern for others who would
have done things differently if there is an agent who
uh cared more about the welfare of others. Um
Would he um check if uh if the spot is
reserved and if the answer is yes, then the
person who didn't check if the spot was reserved is
responsible. But then to complicate the story a bit
more, we added some other factors in, in
the question. So now we say, OK,
the opportunity to learn the information is, is relevant
. Um But then we can ask, is a
person always um obliged to use that opportunity to learn
something and maybe intuitively, um we are not expected
to know everything about everything, right? So when
it is very, it is more important uh to
get, to get informed. And one of the
interesting factors that, that, that we write is
how effortful this action of getting the the adequate information
is. So with the hypothesis that if um if
the action is very effortful and too costly for the
agent, uh that will be some mitigating factor,
and uh there will be less expectation from this agent
to engage in the action that is very costly for
them. Um So, um we showed that that
this was the relevant factor and when there were two
agents who both didn't engage um in the um action
of checking, uh the one who needed less effort
uh to do this action um is where as was
described as, as more responsible to give you an
example. Um If you just need to read the
sign uh to check whether the spot is reserved or
not. Um And you didn't engage in such a
simple action that would not be costly for you,
then you are s ascribe responsible. But if this
action involved waiting for a parking attendant to come and
you don't know when he's coming and you're in a
rush because you will um miss your appointment, then
a person, people are a bit um more um
empathizing with the situation and they ascribe uh less responsibility
. So in this case, when they come back
to this counterfactual theory, we can say that even
the agent who had sufficient care for others uh maybe
wouldn't um check in this situation when the costs are
too high. So there is kind of a benefit
of a doubt given to this to this person.
And we can say that the relevant counterfactual becomes,
if the action was not so effortful, then the
agent would have done it. Um Yeah, so
there is some relevant factor. There are some um
other ones, but let's say these, these are
some, some of the most relevant. We also
checked um the weather. Um the probability of the
navigate outcome happening is what is relevant. Um With
, uh with the idea that if it is highly
unlikely that something uh negative would happen, are you
still asked to, to check? Um and to
, to put some uh put some effort in order
to, to check what is uh what is the
relevant information about that event or to prevent? Um
But this factor didn't seem to be uh relevant.
I mean, there may be reasons that uh the
probabilities that we had were still above some threshold,
above which it is expected from people to act.
So if, even if it's like 30 40% probability
of something negative happening, if the action is so
uh effortless, such as just reading the sign,
you're expected to do it if you can prevent some
harm to others. But this factor is still a
bit uh something that, that is, that should
be researched more. Yeah. So, I mean
, uh it's not the case that people always hold
people responsible. If they haven't gathered all the relevant
information, it depends. Uh I mean, a
little bit on how much effort you have to put
into it to gather all the relevant information. But
I would, I mean, in terms of the
effort, I would imagine that there are particular instances
where people, even if it would take a lot
of effort would still hold you responsible. I mean
, just one clear, I guess example that comes
to mind is in health related situations. I mean
, if a doctor for some reason gets across a
patient with a very rare condition and just because it's
very rare and it would take him or her a
lot of uh uh g uh a lot of time
to gather enough information to really understand how that rare
condition works and how it might interfere with treatments and
other uh comorbidities. For example, people probably people
in that specific case because they are dealing with a
supposed experts would be less lenient in terms of,
I mean, not holding them responsible, particularly if
something bad happens because of that. Yes. Um
Yes, that's, that's a very important what you're
saying. Um I see two relevant things there in
your example, one is um the responsibility that comes
with the obligations with the roles. So we can
talk about the normative expectations of certain roles. So
um like doctors, lawyers or some certain um roles
in the society that are connected to some certain behaviors
. And we expect more, more uh from a
doctor, especially in this situation than of some person
who is not an expert in the field and didn't
oblige to help others and similar. The other relevant
factor that I see there is mostly when we talk
about health and especially in this situation where there is
a serious rare disease we talk about a very severe
outcomes. Um And this is something, this effect
of severity of the outcome is something that has been
studied. Um um in some other context, um
uh when, for example, negligence. Um and
it, it does make a difference, people ascribe
more moral blame uh for agents who uh who produce
more severe um outcomes. Um But in this context
, when we talk about ignorant agents who didn't get
informed and some, some bad happened. Um Then
that, that's a factor that I would, I
would uh like to uh to investigate in some of
my future experiments. What my intuition about it uh
is now is that people are um computing the the
utilities and maybe this now sounds uh sounds weird but
maybe this is the behavioral economist side of me.
Um But I believe that people do um um consider
uh the benefits, cost costs and benefits. Um
And this case, when um the potential harm is
so severe, then um the ratio between uh the
cost for the agent who needs to put some effort
is still lower than the cost. Um The uh
of uh of the agent who would suffer uh from
uh the lack of this prevention. So, in
this case, um the more severe the outcome is
I believe that people hold more expectations from agents to
check the relevant information. Um I cannot claim this
as for my, from my data, but this
is my my, my strong intuition about this.
Um So let's see, maybe some uh next time
I can, I can give you a empirical answer
to that question. Um But yeah, this,
this is what I uh what I think uh for
now. So uh we'll get back to outcomes in
a second. But let me just ask you one
relate relevant information because I was just thinking about what
people usually consider relevant information to be. I mean
, of course, we would have to look perhaps
at specific cases, specific examples. But for example
, going back to the case of, I mean
, relevant information, what if for some reason,
the person cannot have access to particular kinds of relevant
information or if what people think is relevant information is
not even there because for example, we don't know
enough about a particular disease. It has not been
studied enough, there are particular aspects of it that
we don't know about yet. So, uh I
mean, uh basically, what I'm trying to understand
is uh what people tend to consider relevant information basically
. Oh yeah, that's an interesting question. Well
, 11 thing that I would like to mention here
is that um the factor that I was uh I
was uh talking about previously is this opportunity to learn
. And of course, there is no opportunity to
get some information. Um Even the doctor wouldn't be
uh found responsible if there is just no, the
medicine did not develop to the extent that could help
a person or there is no medication available in a
certain context. And uh of course, in this
case, situations when there is no opportunity to act
differently and then the the relevant quant factuals are about
some external factors, right? But this question,
what is the relevant information? Uh I mean,
I'm gonna get a bit uh theoretical but when I
talk about what the relevant information is, I talk
about information that has the power to change the outcome
. OK. Um And that's true what you say
that it's not always obvious what type of information uh
could change the outcome, right? Especially if you're
a doctor and you need to uh check for multiple
options, then you don't know exactly which information would
answer your questions. But if we talk about um
some other interpersonal relations, uh for example, um
you want to take a car of your sibling um
that you share um the relevant information would be,
does my sibling need the car for today? Um
And um you would call, call them to check
um about this. So, uh sometimes what is
the relevant information is very obvious uh such as in
the case of um checking what reading the parking sign
and reading if the spot is, is reserved or
not, can you park there or not? And
the relevant information is yes or no, right?
Uh Because that could change the course of the outcome
if a person, uh, who needs this space
cannot park there. Right. Uh, but,
uh, I mean, I, I agree in
some situations, um, what is relevant to be
known, uh, is not so obvious. Yeah
, that's true. Yeah. And going back to
the outcomes because we've already talked here about how,
uh, if it's a severe outcome, people usually
tend to ascribe more responsibility to the person. But
what if, uh, people get a good outcome
even if they didn't hold, uh, uh,
the relevant information that it was just a good outcome
basically by chance. Do, does that matter to
people or not? Mhm. Um, but do
you mean there, whether a person would be responsible
? Um, or for, I mean, if
, in that case, so let's say that uh
, they get, they got a good outcome but
later people learn that it was mostly by chance because
the person didn't really, uh have, uh,
the relevant information. I mean, just basically did
things they went into it blind, let's say,
and they got a good outcome. I mean,
does that matter? Do people care about that at
all or not? I mean, does that over
, is that more important to people than the fact
that they just got a good outcome or not?
Um, that, that's a good question when we
talk about responsibility, the way I define responsibility is
that, uh, some certain outcome is needed because
responsibility can be seen as a, um, response
to something So when something happens, we can talk
about who is responsible for that certain outcome. Um
But there are other moral judgments that would take these
uh mental states more into account. And that uh
for example, um um Cushman theory, Cushman is
talking about um this how for um judgments of blame
and punishment outcome is, is uh what is very
important and more important than when we talk about the
judgment of moral wrongness, for example. So in
this case, when somebody, um even when there
is no negative outcome, we can still maybe not
talk about whether the person is responsible because nothing bad
happened, but we can talk about whether they acted
morally wrongly. Um for not gathering the right information
such as a doctor who didn't really check for some
relevant conditions before giving the medication that could have produced
some negative consequences. So in that case, I
wouldn't talk about responsibility, but I could talk about
whether it was right or wrong. Um Not to
have a certain information. Um That is the case
of, for example, uh drunk driving, you
can be morally judged for driving drunk, even if
you came home safely by pure luck, right?
So we can, we can judge this action and
your behavior as not being the good one, but
we cannot make you responsible for an outcome that didn't
happen, right? Um This is my take on
this, that uh when I talk about responsibility in
this case, I talk about the, the responsibility
for something that happened, um, some people would
maybe talk about responsibility, like, um, and
that assigning responsibility to people to do certain actions,
like some kind of obligations. But, um,
I talk mostly about the, the responsibility for the
harm that, that happened in this case but we're
sure we can talk about whether the, the,
the, the lack of knowledge, uh, was
bad. Right. Mhm. Right. So let's
get now into strategic ignorance since we're talking about also
epistemic responsibility here. I guess that this ties very
well to that. So what is strategic ignorance?
Exactly. Yes. So we talked about different situations
in which agents are ignorant, right? And there
can be multiple causes why somebody um it was left
ignorant. Strategic ignorance is this specific situation uh when
uh people are using as Dan and colleagues say this
moral wiggle room, uh what it means it means
that since we talked about how in um a lot
of cases, the fact that didn't, didn't know
that something bad can happen, can mitigate the responsibility
. People can use this space to say, oh
I didn't know such as this case with not buying
a transport ticket. Oh I didn't know how to
buy a transport ticket. Um So I'm I'm not
responsible for um I shouldn't be punished for this,
right? So strategic ignorance is ignoring some relevant information
in order to run away from uh the responsibility of
of your actions. Um In my case, we
call it fearful ignorance, but still in these cases
, um, that I mentioned to you such as
a person not checking the parking sign, um,
we can say that the person did that on purpose
so that they are not late for their appointment because
in this case, they would need to change uh
the spot. Uh, they would need to park
and lose some time. So they strategically ignore this
in order not to be uh not to feel morally
obliged to change their actions. That's the idea.
Um Either to themselves um or to other people.
So basically, to save some kind of a positive
picture of themselves or they want other people to think
more positively of them. So if you say,
oh, I didn't know I took somebody else's spot
, um It's not the same as saying, oh
yeah, I, I knew that was reserved,
but I didn't care. Right. Um And there
are interesting experiments of, of Dan and colleagues.
Um you know, dictator games. Um So this
economic games where um you give certain um um certain
um outcomes for people. If you get six points
, a person will, or$6 a person will
get$1. But uh if you choose to have
um$5 a person will also have$5 and then
you are asked to choose which outcome uh would,
would you prefer? Um And basically what these type
of games are testing is whether there is some kind
of a uh prosocial, so whether people would uh
also think about other people's welfare and not only their
own, right? Um And when you show this
information transparent like that, so what is the outcome
for you and for the other person? Um people
in a lot of cases um are doing, choosing
a prosocial answer. So choosing such as that they
maximize or optimize the developer for the other person.
So what they would rather choose, rather choose five
for both than six for them and one for the
other person. But what's interesting is that if you
cover um what is the outcome for the other person
? And you say it's 50% chance that it's either
one or five. Um So a person who chooses
, doesn't know what would be the possible outcome for
the other person. And then the question is um
they, the people have the opportunity to cover,
to uncover this and to learn what would be the
outcome for the other person. So they have this
like uh reveal, reveal part, the a lot
of people they don't choose to reveal, that's the
thing. Uh less than 60% percent of um of
people choose to reveal what would be the outcome for
the other person and why they do this. So
they, they con they can continue choosing more for
them without feeling bad because they have some kind of
a benefit of a doubt or this moral wiggle room
. So you say, well, I choose more
for me, but I didn't know what the other
person would get and they can be, they can
save their self uh self picture. And also how
other people see them, they can be, they
can remain perceived as, as a fair person.
That that's the idea of that. Of course,
if they choose to reveal, then people would choose
an option that uh mostly choose the option that maximizes
also the benefit for the other person. Um So
this type of strategic ignorance is, is, is
very interesting. Um But now in real life,
some examples apart from this, not reading the parking
sign and parking wherever you want are um even some
like health related things like you are, you don't
want to know how bad smoking actually is because uh
with smoking or you don't want to learn particular information
about your group that you belong to because you don't
want to um think more about your group identity and
reconsider it. Um And uh or for example,
you don't want to see how mu how many um
sugar, how much sugar your favorite drink has because
you just want to continue drinking it um and similar
. So people do this in, in a lot
of cases that are related to others or, or
just related to themselves. And um yeah, um
and to be able to uh to continue with doing
what they want to do but still um having some
nice, some good picture about themselves. And there's
also a problem with some certain ecological behaviors that people
are ignoring how they affect the community. The,
the, the, the, the ecology uh because
changing their behavior to start recycling um et cetera can
be effortful and not something that they want to change
. Um Maybe some people would call this rather deliberate
ignorance than strategic ignorance. So this uh terminology is
sometimes a bit confusing because you have uh strategic ignorance
, deliberate ignorance, skillful ignorance, uh et cetera
. Maybe I would say the strategic ignorance is more
concerned with this uh that relates for others to others
, such as kind of this justification. Why you
did something or being perceived as positive in the eyes
of other people. But so maybe I would call
deliberate ignorance um this um behavior that are related to
your health, choices and stuff. Um Hertwig and
people from the Max Planck Institute for Human Development have
a lot of papers on deliberate ignorance. Um And
then they use this terminology. Um So, so
yeah, those are some also some interesting literature to
check on this topic. Who is more interested?
Yeah. Yeah, great. So uh this will
probably be my last uh question. But I would
also like to get into uh perhaps some more concrete
example, uh health care related example. You al
you also mentioned health there. So because the there
are particular cases. And I also read about this
in the literature where people actually use strategic ignorance but
are really a little bit more severe in terms of
the possible outcomes. It can have, I mean
, people, when they read about it, many
people think, oh my God, why would people
do that? So when it comes to, for
example, uh, sexually transmitted infections or ST s
, there are actually cases where people, I mean
, they might think that they might have been exposed
to an ST I, and they might have got
it but they don't want to get tested, uh
, in that particular case and sometimes it might be
something very serious like A I DS or something like
that. So, uh, a and in that
particular case, I guess that people find it a
bit weird, that kind of literature because, uh
, I mean, if it's, for example,
uh, tobacco use or if you're, uh,
consuming too much su sugar, people might think that
, ok, that's not great, but at least
you're not affecting other people or potentially harming other people
. It's just yourself. But in that particular case
, I mean, there's a very big potential there
that you will be harming other people. And in
that specific, I mean, it, it could
be the case that in a particular case you were
exposed accidentally an sti, I mean, it could
have not been transmitted sexually and you didn't know at
all. And so that's a different thing. But
if you think that you might have got it,
then, I mean, that's completely different, right
? So why, why, why do people do
that? Exactly. That's a great, uh,
comment. Now I can get a bit more personal
as to why did they choose to start working on
this topic? That is not exactly the example that
you mentioned, but, um, how this question
of how much should we know? How much should
we check? How much should we care of not
affecting other people? All these questions were always some
kind of my interest. Um and this concern for
others. But when we talk about health, it
especially arose when I moved to Austria. So I
disclaimer, I moved to Austria in the time of
COVID. So 2021 and in Austria, the lockdown
measures, the COVID testing measures were very severe.
So I moved from Serbia where PC R tests were
not possible to be done by your own choice.
Only if you have symptoms, if you wanted to
do it just to check if you maybe were exposed
, uh or you think that uh you were exposed
or similar, you needed to pay60 let's say
then I moved to Austria where testing is the easiest
thing ever. You just do it at your home
. It's for free. You can do it every
day at the time when I moved. And then
I felt obliged to do the test almost every day
because I felt, what is the justification of not
doing the test it for free? It's easy.
There is no reason not to do it. So
I felt even a bit obsessed with, with this
because I felt so responsible to check, right?
Um And then I was asking this question. So
why do I feel like this, you know how
this moving change these expectations for myself so much?
And um and yeah, I mean, this kind
of a, um, um, thinking that maybe
you are, uh, you have the disease or
similar can be translated to the example that, that
you mentioned. And indeed this uh, question of
transmissible sexually transmissible diseases is very, very important.
Um, and I think I'm not sure, uh
, we could ask legal um, practitioners but,
uh, that even transmitting, uh, transmitting some
serious, uh, sexually transmittable diseases is, um
, is illegal if not to, to, to
dis, to disclose that you have them, right
? Um, so it's a very serious problem.
Um And, um, of course, here we
have the similar, um, motivation for not checking
, which is, um, in case of some
uh transmittable diseases, um, is that you want
to continue, um, doing what you want,
um, which is having some, some, some
pleasure and you don't want to talk about that.
You don't want to maybe stop for some time,
uh, and similar. Um, and then this
, there is this strategic motivation I'm not gonna check
because then I can continue doing what I'm doing.
Um, and I don't feel so guilty about it
. Right. The other part of that, um
, that doesn't include this lack of care for others
, which I would say it's a lack of care
for others if you, um, have a serious
suspicion, especially that you could be, um,
infected, but you don't check the other part of
that, um, is connected with the emotional regulation
, which is also a case with some other diseases
. Um that people don't want to know if they
are sick. Uh So even if they have some
symptoms, they are afraid of some um some negative
information, especially if you, if, if some
very serious transmittable diseases are in question that you may
feel uh afraid to learn uh that you have some
of them. Um And this fear is stopping you
from, from checking. Um But of course,
I mean, what my research would say about that
is that um if there is some reason to,
to be suspicious, especially and uh if you have
um and a sufficient care for others that uh it
is expected like that you would have have checked,
especially if it's uh if it's available to you.
But since if we talk about something very serious,
then I get to go back to my question.
People would consider the utility and if it's uh it's
an important uh topic as such here, transmittable diseases
, you could put a bit more effort uh to
find out whether you have something that could harm others
. Yeah. A and in the particular case of
, uh, STIs, for example. And in
the law, II, I mean, of course
, I'm not a law expert or anything like that
and I don't know the laws of different countries but
I would imagine just intuitively, uh, someone simply
suspecting that they might have been infected and not testing
, uh, in the eyes of the law would
be different than actually having tested and know for sure
that you have the disease and still continue on with
the behavior and infecting other people. Because in the
first case, you might still have some plausible deniability
. Right. Yes. Um Yes, that's true
. And as far as I know, as I
think, I know, um this, uh I
like um punishment, uh like legal punishment for that
behavior is only in the case if you know.
Um But since I was working on this case of
beautiful ignorance, I was reading a lot even about
some uh philosophy of law and some law articles.
And in some cases, some philosophers even claim um
that in some cases, the willful ignorance can be
perceived similarly to knowledge. Uh because in, in
view of the mens rea which is this guilty mind
and if there was a sufficient suspicion. Yeah.
Um, did that you could have checked, that
could be also punishable. I think it depends on
the country on the legal system. It's a question
whether it's just like, um, now some kind
of a open discussion, I'm not sure exactly about
this because again, I'm not a legal practitioner just
interested in this topic. So, uh, I
come, uh, to read some, some certain
stuff like this. Um, but, uh,
yeah, in some cases being, um, having
a reasonable suspicion, such in this case is your
three ex partners of yours told you that they have
HPV, uh, or you have some certain symptoms
of it. I'm not sure how this particular case
would be treated in the legal system. Um uh
or uh when we talk about um some, some
other diseases. Um but uh but that, that
um this reasonable suspicion can sometimes be even enough.
Um Yeah, maybe not in this health context but
in some other context when you're harming others or killing
someone extent. Um and it's similar, maybe in
these cases, this having enough reasons to be suspicious
could, could lead to more severe judgments. Yes
. Yeah. The only reason why I brought that
distinction to the table between actually knowing that you have
the disease and just suspecting that you might have it
, but not really testing is that psychologically speaking and
from the perspective of psychology and cognitive science, perhaps
uh for people who actually do not care about harming
others and just want to go on having fun or
something like that, then in the case where they
don't test, I, I mean, in their
own self interest. Uh, it would be better
for them because that, because then they would,
if they are ready, do not care about harming
others, then adding to that they would have more
plausible deniability because I didn't even actually test it.
So I didn't know that the idea of this moral
wiggle room and that was strategic, strategic ignorance is
using this fact that sometimes not knowing, uh is
mitigating your moral judgment towards you. And you're using
this moral wiggle room of not saying, oh,
I didn't know exactly that's the problem. But what
I want to claim there is that, well,
that's, that's not always the excuse, you know
, maybe we're supposed to know, maybe we're supposed
to care more and then if you cared more,
then you will know. And uh yeah, some
, some philosophers would agree with this. Um um
because what we do sometimes is as moral psychologist,
we um can take some, some notions from,
from philosophy, some uh prescriptive theories and then test
them empirically. And um some people do talk about
the quality of y and uh this uh recognizing whether
the agent uh had uh in consideration the, the
, the welfare of others, even if come to
produce some negative outcomes. Um They, they would
be not judged as blame, very irresponsible. Um
Yeah, so um yeah, II I want to
, to study this more in my future research,
this for sociality and care for others. Um And
how it influences some certain decisions that we make and
certain expectations uh from people. Um Yeah, I
think it's important to take other people into because I
mean, that's my personal value. I would say
uh taking some other people in the consideration when you
make certain decisions and then to see what, to
what extent it is, uh it is reasonable to
what extent people uh people think it is reasonable.
Um Yeah, let's, let's say like that.
Ok, great. So let's leave it. Uh
Let's leave that as perhaps a teaser for a possible
future conversation once you've finished your phd. So just
before we go, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on the
internet? Um Yes. So we recently published a
preprint that um is um called, you should have
checked and uh the importance of epistemic intentions in description
of responsibility um with my co authors, Francesca Bonna
Lomi and Christoph Heinz, my supervisor. Um Also
you can find me on the Aces um like the
Cards Aces uh page uh at CEO, which is
the, the name of my lab. Um um
So, so yeah, um those are some,
some places you can find me and there you can
see my email address on the CEO website. Um
So yes, if you, if you have any
questions, please feel free to, to uh to
uh email me. Yeah, for sure. Or
always on linkedin, you can find me. So
I'm, I'm on multiple locations. Ok, great
. So Luke Karin, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a real pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you so much. Thanks. Ok, great
. So Luke Karin, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a real pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you so much. Hi, everyone. Thank
you for watching this interview. Until the end.
If you like what I'm doing, please consider supporting
the show on Patreon or paypal. You can find
the links in the description box down below and if
you like the interview, please share it, leave
a like hit the subscription button and comment. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning and
development and differently check their website at N lights.com.
I would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Pero Larson
, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunder Bernard. So all
of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whittenberg, Arno Wolf
, Tim Hollis, Eric Alan J con Philip Forrest
Connolly. Then the mere Robert Windier ruin. Nai
Z Mark Nebs Colin hope Mikel Storm Andre Francis for
the Agn Fergal Ken Harl hero, Jonathan lebron and
Eric Heinz Mark Smith Hummels are friends, David Wr
Ro Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicolo, Barbaro, Adam
hunt Palo Stassi, Nele Bach Guy, Madison,
Gary G Hellman, Samo Zal, Adrian Yi Paul
Tolentino. Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Bruner Douglas
Fre Franco Bartolo Gabriel Pan Cortez or Lalit Scott Zachary
Fish, Tim Duffy and Smith John Wiesman, Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgina, L Lo
A Georges, Theo Chris Williams and Peter W David
Williams the Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shower
, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore atheists,
Larry D Lee Junior, Old Harri Bon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then Sperber, Robert Grass is a Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix Mark Temple, Thomas
Dubner, Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin GALT, Jessica Nowicki Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlson
, Ismael Bensley Man, George Kiss Valentin Steinman,
Per Rowley, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Robert Liam
Donaway br Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular, Jonas Herner,
Ursula. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson and Mike Levin. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stefi
, Tom Ween, Bernard Yugi Cortes Dixon Benedict Muller
Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl
Montenegro, Alick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adriano
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all